Reorganize SCU sections (#871)
digital-asset/docs.daml.com: docs/2.10.0/docs/upgrade/smart-contract-upgrades.rst

``#app1:mod:T``, then the events stream will include events from both
template-ids: ``pkgId1:mod:T`` and ``pkgId2:mod:T``

Migrating to SCU
================

SCU is only supported on LF1.17, which in turn is only supported on
Canton Protocol Version 7. This means that existing deployed contracts require migration and redeployment to utilize this feature.

First you must migrate your Daml model to be compatible with
upgrades; see `Best Practices <#best-practices>`__ for what to
change here. Pay particular attention to the case of interfaces and
exceptions, as failure to do so could lead to packages which are

> incompatible with SCU and require the use of a separate tool (and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
incompatible with SCU and require the use of another full migration (and
```

.. code:: daml

  module Helper where

  interface I where
    ...

.. code:: yaml

  sdk-version: 2.10.0
  name: helper
  version: 1.0.0
  source: Helper.daml
  dependencies:
  - daml-prim
  - daml-stdlib
  build-options:
  - --target=1.17

.. code:: daml

  module Main where

  import qualified Helper

  template T with
    ...

.. code:: yaml

  sdk-version: 2.10.0
  name: main
  version: 1.0.0
  source: Main.daml
  dependencies:
  - daml-prim
  - daml-stdlib
  data-dependencies:
  - <path to helper DAR>
  build-options:
  - --target=1.17

Remove Retroactive Instances
----------------------------

SCU eliminates the need for retroactive instances and is not
compatible with them. To ensure package selection for interface choices
acts correctly, retroactive interface instances should be moved to newer
versions of templates, such that changes to the instance warrants a new
version of the template.

Explicit Template Versions
--------------------------

If you need package version specific behavior that cannot just depend on
the presence or absence of new fields, then one workaround would be to
tag your contracts in their payload with an explicit version field.

> This allows for less fragile behavior in the event of
> "partial upgrades" (where a user may only upgrade part of the payload of
> a package, intentionally), and allows you to model rollbacks as upgrades
> in a principled manner.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This makes
"partial upgrades" (where a user may only upgrade part of the payload of
a package, intentionally) less fragile, and allows you to model rollbacks as upgrades
in a principled manner.
```

Avoid Contract Metadata Changes
-------------------------------

> The signatories, observers, contract key and ensure clauses of a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The signatories, observers, contract key, and ensure clauses of a
```

> contract should be fixed at runtime for a given contract. Changing their
> definitions in your Daml code triggers a warning from the SCU
> typechecker, and is discouraged. Note that for contract keys, the type
> cannot change at all, only its value. Should you need to change these
> values, be aware that if their runtime value changes in any way, the
> upgrade, and thus the full transaction, fails. Contracts in this
> state can then only be used by explicitly choosing the older version of
> the contract in your transaction.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
contract should be fixed at runtime for a given contract. Changing their
definitions in your Daml code is discouraged and triggers a warning from the SCU
typechecker. Note that contract keys cannot change type, only value. In addition, if their runtime value changes in any way, the
upgrade, and thus the full transaction, fails. Contracts in this
state can only be used if you explicitly choose the older version of
the contract in your transaction.
```

.. _upgrade_package_naming:

Breaking Changes via Explicit Package Version
---------------------------------------------

To make a breaking change to your package that
is not upgrade compatible, you can change the name of your package to indicate a
breaking version bump. To enable this, we recommend that your package
name contains a version marker for when a breaking change occurs.

For example, for your first iteration of a package, you would name it
``main-v1``, starting with package version ``1.0.0``. In this case, the ``v1``
is part of the *package name*, not the package version. You could publish
upgrade-compatible versions by changing the ``version:`` field from ``1.0.0`` to
``2.0.0`` to ``3.0.0``. These versions would all be upgrade-compatible with
one another:

.. code:: text

  main-v1-1.0.0
  main-v1-2.0.0
  main-v1-3.0.0

Note how the ``v1`` in all three packages remains stable - this means the
package name has not changed, and ensures that these three packages and their
datatypes are considered by the runtime and the type checker to be upgradeable.

> When you want to make a breaking change, you would publish a new version of the
> package with package name ``main-v2``. Because this package would have a
> different package name from those with ``main-v1``, it would not be typechecked
> against those packages and its datatypes would not automatically be converted.
> You would need to manually migrate values from ``main-v1`` packages to
> ``main-v2`` -- existing downtime upgrade techniques are listed :ref:`here <upgrades-index>`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To make a breaking change, publish a new package version with package name ``main-v2``. Because this package has a
different package name from those with ``main-v1``, it is not typechecked
against those packages and its datatypes are not automatically converted.
You would need to manually migrate values from ``main-v1`` packages to
``main-v2`` -- existing downtime upgrade techniques are listed :ref:`here <upgrades-index>`.
```

3. Upload version 2.0 of your DAR.
4. Switch your backends to start using version 2.0, ideally this should be a flag.
5. Validate that the core workflows are in the same state and advance them to check that they are not stuck.

SCU Support in Daml Tooling
===========================

Codegen
-------

> For packages that support SCU (i.e. LF1.17), generated code uses
> package-names in place of package-ids in template IDs. Retrieved data
> from the ledger is subject to the upgrade transformations described
> in previous sections.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For packages that support SCU (i.e. LF1.17), generated code uses
package names in place of package IDs in template IDs. Retrieved data
from the ledger is subject to the upgrade transformations described
in previous sections.
```

Concretely, this is implemented as follows:

Java
~~~~

> The classes that are generated for each template and interface contain a
> ``TEMPLATE_ID`` field, which, for upgradable packages, now use a
> package name rather than a package ID. To help you determine
> the package ID of these packages, we have added a new ``PACKAGE_ID`` field to all
> such classes. Upgradable packages also cause ``PACKAGE_NAME`` and
> ``PACKAGE_VERSION`` fields to be present.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The classes that are generated for each template and interface contain a
``TEMPLATE_ID`` field, which, for upgradable packages, now use a
package name rather than a package ID. To help you determine
the package ID of these packages, we have added a new ``PACKAGE_ID`` field to all
such classes. Upgradable packages also have ``PACKAGE_NAME`` and
``PACKAGE_VERSION`` fields.
```

TypeScript
~~~~~~~~~~

> The ``templateId`` field on generated template classes has been updated to
> use the package-name as the package qualifier for upgrade compatible
> packages. This is used for command submission and queries. However,
> note that the package qualifier given back in queries contains the
> package-id, rather than the package-name. Generated modules now also
> give the package "reference", which is the package-name for upgrade-compatible packages; for other packages it is the package-id.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The ``templateId`` field on generated template classes has been updated to
use the package name as the package qualifier for upgrade-compatible
packages. This is used for command submission and queries. However,
note that queries return the package qualifier with the
package ID rather than the package name. Generated modules now also
give the package "reference", which is the package name for upgrade-compatible packages; for other packages it is the package ID.
```

> To perform package-id qualified commands/queries in an upgrade
> compatible package, a copy of the template object can be created using
> the following:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To perform package ID-qualified commands/queries in an upgrade
compatible package, create a copy of the template object using
the following:
```

.. code:: typescript

  const MyTemplateWithPackageId = { 
    ...pkg.Mod.MyTemplate,
    templateId: `${pkg.packageId}:Mod:MyTemplate`,
  }

.. _json-api-server-1:

JSON API Server
----------------

> Template IDs may still be used with a package ID, however,
> for packages built as LF 1.17 or greater, the package may also be

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Template IDs may still be used with a package ID; however,
for packages built as LF 1.17 or greater, the package may also be
```

identified by name. That is to say, for upgradable packages a template ID can have
the form ``#<package-name>:<module-name>:<template-name>``, and this is
resolved to corresponding templates from all packages which share this

> name, and are built at 1.17 or above. For packages built at LF 1.15,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
name and are built at 1.17 or above. For packages built at LF 1.15,
```

the templates are not identifiable via a package name, and a
package ID must be used.

Note: template IDs in query results always use a package ID. This

> allows us to distinguish the source of a particular contract. This means

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
allows you to distinguish the source of a particular contract. This means
```

that if you use a template with a package name in the request, you can
no longer expect the template IDs in the result to exactly match the
input template ID.

Package ID selection preference: preferences apply to JSON API where you
can specify your preferred selection of package versions.

PQS
---

To match the package-name changes to the Ledger API, PQS has changed how packages
are selected for queries. All queries that take a Daml identity in the form 

> ``<package-id>:<module-name>:<template-name>`` now take a package-name in place 
> of package-id. Note that this differs from the Ledger API in that the `#` prefix

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
``<package-id>:<module-name>:<template-name>`` now take a package name in place 
of package ID. Note that this differs from the Ledger API in that the `#` prefix
```

> is not required for PQS, as PQS has dropped direct package-id queries.
> Queries for package-names will return all versions of a given contract, alongside the
> package-version and package-id for each contract.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
is not required for PQS, as PQS has dropped direct package ID queries.
Queries for package names return all versions of a given contract, alongside the
package version and package ID for each contract.
```

.. note::

>   If you still need to perform a query with an explicit package-id, you can either use
>   a previous version of PQS, or add the following filter predicate to your query:
>   ``SELECT \* FROM active('my_package:My.App:MyTemplate') WHERE package_id = 'my_package_id'``

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  If you still need to perform a query with an explicit package ID, you can either use
  a previous version of PQS or add the following filter predicate to your query:
  ``SELECT \* FROM active('my_package:My.App:MyTemplate') WHERE package_id = 'my_package_id'``
```

Given that PQS uses a document-oriented model for ledger content
(JSONB), extensions to contract payloads are handled simply by returning
the additional data in the blob.

Daml Shell
----------

> Daml Shell builds on PQS by providing a shell interface to inspect the
> ledger using package-name to view all versions of contracts, in an
> integrated way.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Daml Shell builds on PQS by providing a shell interface to inspect the
ledger using package name to create an integrated view of all versions of contracts.
```

Daml-Script
-----------

> Daml 2.10 introduces a new version of Daml Script, which can be used by
> depending on ``daml-script-lts`` in your ``daml.yaml``, as you will have seen
> in `Writing your first upgrade <#writing-your-first-upgrade>`__. This version of Daml Script
> supports upgrades over the Ledger API.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Daml 2.10 introduces a new version of Daml Script which can be used by
depending on ``daml-script-lts`` in your ``daml.yaml``, as described
in `Writing your first upgrade <#writing-your-first-upgrade>`__. This version of Daml Script
supports upgrades over the Ledger API.
```

> All commands and queries in this version of Daml Script now use
> upgrades/downgrades automatically, to ensure that the correct versions
> of choices are exercises, and correct payloads are returned.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
All commands and queries in this version of Daml Script now use
upgrades/downgrades automatically to ensure that they exercise the correct versions
of choices and return correct payloads.
```

The following additional functionality is available for more advanced
uses of SCU.

**Exact commands**

> Each of the four submission commands now has an "exact" variant, of the
> forms ``createExactCmd``, ``exerciseExactCmd``, ``exerciseByKeyExactCmd`` and
> ``createAndExerciseExactCmd``. These commands force the participant to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Each of the four submission commands now has an "exact" variant: ``createExactCmd``, ``exerciseExactCmd``, ``exerciseByKeyExactCmd``, and
``createAndExerciseExactCmd``. These commands force the participant to
```

> use the exact version of the package that your script uses, this is most
> useful when you want to be absolutely certain of the choice code you are
> calling. Note that exact and non-exact commands can be mixed in the same
> submission.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
use the exact version of the package that your script uses, so you can be certain of the choice code you are
calling. Note that exact and non-exact commands can be mixed in the same
submission.
```

.. _daml-script-package-preference:

**Package Preference**

A submission can specify a `package preference <#dynamic-package-resolution-in-ledger-api-queries>`__,
as a list of package IDs:

.. code:: daml

  (actAs alice <> packagePreference [myPackageId]) `submitWithOptions` createCmd ...

Note the use of ``submitWithOptions : SubmitOptions -> Commands a -> Script a``.
You can build ``SubmitOptions`` by combining the ``actAs`` and ``packagePreference`` functions with ``<>``.

The full list of builders for ``SubmitOptions`` is as follows:

.. code:: daml

  -- `p` can be `Party`, `[Party]`, etc.
  actAs : IsParties p => p -> SubmiOptions
  readAs : IsParties p => p -> SubmitOptions

  disclose : Disclosure -> SubmitOptions
  discloseMany : [Disclosure] -> SubmitOptions

  newtype PackageId = PackageId Text
  packagePreference : [PackageId] -> SubmitOptions

> A ``PackageId`` can be hard-coded in your script, which must be updated whenever the package changes. Otherwise,
> it can be provided using the ``--input-file`` flag of the ``daml script`` command line tool.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A ``PackageId`` can be hard-coded in your script, in which case it must be updated whenever the package changes. Otherwise,
it can be provided using the ``--input-file`` flag of the ``daml script`` command line tool.
```

> The following example demonstrates reading the package ID from a dar and passing it to a script.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following example demonstrates reading the package ID from a DAR and passing it to a script:
```

.. code:: bash

  # Path to the dar you want to pass as package preference.
  PACKAGE_DAR=path/to/main/dar.dar
  # Path to the dar containing the Daml script for which you want to pass the package-id
  SCRIPT_DAR=path/to/script/dar.dar
  # Extract the package-id of PACKAGE_DAR's main package.
  daml damlc inspect-dar ${PACKAGE_DAR} --json | jq '.main_package_id' > ./package-id-script-input.json
  # replace --ide-ledger with --ledger-host and --ledger-port for deployed Canton
  daml script --dar ${SCRIPT_DAR} --script-name Main:main --ide-ledger --input-file ./package-id-script-input.json

> Following this, your script would look like

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Following this, your script would look like:
```
